In this chapter, we are going to have
a look at some common tasks that
we'll eventually end up doing in
practically every application.
That being injecting configuration data
into Quarkus class or into
a Quarkus microservice.
We have an exercise for that.
Then we are going to have a look
at how to use those features
to implement feature
toggles in a microservice.
Again, a guided exercise for that.
Then lastly, we are going to
have a look at how to use
service discovery to connect
multiple services together
and there's an exercise for that as well.
And as usual, there is an
end of chapter review lab.
It's critical that applications
can be reconfigured to adapt,
to behave correctly in
whatever environment
they are being, either
tested in, integration
tested in, bullet proofed in,
performance stressed in, and ultimately
of course deployed to production
and there will be different settings
in each of those environments,
I'm sure. Even for example,
in performance testing,
there might be some tunables that
changed several times during
the performance tests,
calibration, for example.
So it's important to be able to access
those configurables from within
the application as well.
Now there is a MicroProfile Config
specification that helps you
inject or helps you source
external configuration data and
bring it into your application.
And the base concept
for the MicroProfile Config
specification is that of a ConfigSource.
There are several different ConfigSources like System Properties,
Environment Variables, property files.
We will have a look at exactly how they
relate to each other a little bit later.
Now, the ConfigSources are loaded,
overlaid according to their priority.
And then the highest priority
values can be accessed
using a simple annotation
called ConfigProperty.
So consider the following
application properties
file. There are 3 properties.
One called format, the other one unit,
and the third one, debug-flag.
If we wanted to access those values,
of course, Quarkus automatically
loads application properties
when the application is started.
We simply have to use
the @ConfigProperty annotation on the
field that we want to inject it into and
the name of the property in the
configuration file determines
what value is going to be
injected into that variable.
Now, if you are familiar with
the MicroProfile Config
specification already,
you will notice one interesting detail here.
Generally, in classic Java applications,
you will have to mark
this particular piece
of code as an injection point
using an @Inject annotation.
That's one of the many differences,
tiny but interesting, perhaps
differences that Quarkus has compared
to traditional environments.
It does not have to be marked as
an injection point in Quarkus.
It actually the sole use
of @ConfigProperty
annotation marks it as
such and does the job.
The second example is @ConfigProperty
name debug-flag,
where we assign a defaultValue.
So even if it's not present in
the application properties file,
it's going to have a value and we simply
assign it to the debug-flag field.
Third one, called the unit
as basically the same,
but in the source code
is marked as optional.
So what is the difference?
The difference is that the format,
if it's not present in the
application properties files,
will actually cause a null point to exception
in any object type other than string.
Now in the string object type,
it will actually be an empty string,
but we can access
properties in a more safe way if
we simply mark them as optional
and of course specify the
the container type.
You can then use that optional in wherever
you need to use it by
referring to it by its field name,
and then using orElse,
which we will then use whatever value is
assigned to the variable, to the field,
or if there is no value,
use the fall backward.
So it's just 1 of 2 ways
of providing default values.
Either using defaultValue on
the @ConfigProperty annotation or using an
optional within orElse accessor.
The above example could be refactored
into an even easier way of accessing
properties using the @ConfigProperties
annotation note the plural here.
Now this is an annotation that allows you
to simply take a group of properties with
a specific prefix and inject all of
the fields following that
prefix into an interface.
So what you do in writing the class,
mean it can be a class actually,
in that case, you simply annotate it using
@ConfigProperties and specifying a prefix.
But actually, it could
also be an interface.
So an interface does not really
need any getters and setters.
We just have to specify a name for
it, annotate it with a @ConfigProperties
annotation,
and just declare the methods
that Quarkus should use to access
those properties in it. It will generate
the implementation for
this interface on the fly
when we are compiling the application.
Really cool, saves a lot of work.
Now note that we still have to use
the @ConfigProperty annotation on
the DebugFlag because we
want to set a defaultValue
but apart from that,
ConfigProperties takes care
of all the injection
into the fields of this class.
Do note that in the
example over here above,
debug-flag is an option
that is not, an attribute that
is not a valid Java field
name.
Minuses are not allowed in Java
variables or Java field names
and that is why actually
it gets automatically
converted when we use @ConfigProperties
into the camelCase format.
So the minus is actually
removed and affects
the following letter in that, the following
letter is converted to uppercase. Alright!
So that's how this works.
We can use the generated
interface in our code or if we use
a separate property class
that is annotated with
the @ConfigProperties
simply by injecting it
and then of course,
using the getter methods for our
values in whatever way necessary.
Interesting is that @ConfigProperties
does support nested objects,
so if your interface is annotated
with the @ConfigProperties
annotation, selecting a certain
prefix from a config file.
If you have a sub
interface declared in it
and one of the fields is actually a
type that matches this sub interface.
You can take the fields of
that sub interface as nested
properties of that field.
So we've got an example user in
the attribute, would be called
user because the getters
convention is obviously
get, then attribute name getUser.
So that's why in the properties,
the prefixes example,
the section is called
user and then any field,
any getter defined in the interface,
the sub-interface is also converted into
a property underneath a
subclass or a sub attributes.
There are going to be
various different types of
environments that you are going
to run your application in.
Of course, first of all,
locally using the dev
mode maven quarkus dev
right, to perhaps test the application
quickly implement some last second
code changes, reload them and so on.
You're going to want to use different
settings for that type of testing,
then when you, for example,
build and deploy the application
in OpenShift and run it there.
There's another lifecycle phase
where you might want to
use different settings,
which is Maven test. Alright?
So these are actually the 3
different distinct
configuration profiles that
have built into Quarkus.
The dev one is
activated automatically when you are
running the application
in development mode.
The test one is activated when
running the unit tests and prod,
which is the default profile,
is activated whenever doing
anything other than the first two.
How can you use different values
in either of those profiles?
Well, the prod profile is simply stating
the configuration attribute
in assigning it the value.
This is basically prod.
Anything that you prefix
to the attribute name
is then the name becomes the name of
the profile you want to use
that particular value in.
So for prod, we are going to
use the example.user.
username or student.
When running unit tests,
we want to use the
username of teststudent
and in dev mode when we are
running the application using
maven quarkus dev we want
to use the dev profile,
so we said dev.example.user.
username to devstudent.
Note that for example,
the email is not set in the dev profile,
which means that it will simply
fall back to the default one.
So if any one attribute is
missing in either profile,
the defaults from prod are
actually used for it.
You can actually define
your custom profiles.
There's no problem with that.
You can simply set the
quarkus.profile
attributes on the command
line and give it a name
and then that corresponding section
from application properties, we will
use or you can even set the
profile name on the command line,
using an environment variable
called QUARKUS_PROFILE
setting it to the name,
the profile you want to use.
Now back to ConfigSources,
we have mentioned them
earlier in this section.
There is a strict and
clear priority
with regard to where your
values are loaded from.
Let's say if you set the value both in
Application Properties and
in an Environment Variable
and then finally also on
the Java command line
using the minus d inside
a system property,
the lowest priority goes
to Application Properties.
Then we have the Kubernetes Config Maps,
Secrets which are managed by OpenShift
and of course, the various that
quarkus.openshift attributes
where you map Config Map values into
the deployment config.
There is an option of loading
in an environment file,
if it's present in the route
directory of your application.
There is an option
obviously of setting values
from Environment Variables
in the highest one
setting them as Java System Properties,
most commonly on the command line.
Now this is lowest to highest priority,
highest priority being of
course, the command line.
So in addition to application.properties,
we saw a couple of interesting new ones,
new ways of setting values in our
configuration and environment file is
actually simply a file called
.env in the route directory
of the application.
And the main difference is to
application.properties or
just simply the syntax
and the fact that it
has a higher priority.
So converting application property names
into environment variable
names is rather simple.
In any letter that you use an application.properties has to be uppercased,
any dots are converted to underscores,
any dashes are converted
to underscores and
any percent signs at the
beginning of the line when
configuring a profile are also
converted to underscores.
So essentially from whatever is a
dot hyphen or a percent sign,
you just simply get a bunch of
underscores in the env file
and then of course, the value of
the property is literal, so
you just use the same,
the same type as you would use
in application.properties.
Environment variables are
set on the command line
or in the environment prior
to running a maven command.
So apart from being simply
written prior or a head of the
command that you will be executing,
they can also be set using
export in the shell
and if they're present,
then of course they will be used over
and above application properties,
config map secrets in environment files.
And ultimately the highest priority of
all goes to the Java system properties
and they are simply
properties that are set on
the Java Virtual Machine command line
using the minus capital D option.
Not all values that you want
to assign to your attributes will
be simple String or Boolean
or digit scalar values.
Sometimes you'll have to deal
with data structures that are
simply encoded in a longer string
using special separators or whatever.
You can create your own data converters.
So it's possible to implement
the Converter interface.
Now, let's see an example,
we have a @ConfigProperties annotated
example configuration interface,
just like we've seen in the previous
parts of previous examples
in this section, we have
the users of attribute,
which defines 2 attributes,
username and email.
Now let's say that this user
attribute is actually specified in
our property file or even environment
variable wherever in a single string.
So we have to be able to
split that single string and
inject it into 2
properties of that class.
Here's an example for that
particular user's value.
So clearly the first part prior
to the colon is the user name
and the second part is the user's email,
very simple example,
but it goes far enough to prove a point.
So to be able to convert that
long String into 2 attributes,
we simply have to define
a class, give it a name,
and tell the JVM that it
implements a Converter for
the sub class of the
ExampleConfiguration interface.
Then simply Override the
convert method.
Getting a string that is obviously the
value of the property as a parameter
and then do whatever
processing that you need to.
You just have to return
the correct type for the
converters generics configuration.
Now, once you've implemented a converter,
of course, you have to
let Quarkus know about it.
You simply have to create a META-INF/services / directory inside src/
main/resources/ and put an org.eclipse.
microprofile.config.spi.Converter file into it.
So this is a file and the
contents of this file
must contain the Fully Qualified
Name of your Converter class.
So org.acme.example,
ExampleUserConverter.
Let's head on to the next
exercise where we inject
some configuration data
into our applications.
See you there.